in the year 2020 millions of people in
the english-speaking world are engaged
in reflections on how and why the Star
Wars sequence of films degenerated into
garbage I think it's a meaningful area
of analysis even if you regard the Star
Wars films themselves as meaningless I
think it leads us to some useful
observations about the gap between how
investors see cultural production and
how artists see cultural production and
the gap between artists and the audience
because ultimately neither the artist
nor the investor nor the loudest voices
in the audience really identify what it
is that made the work of art special or
worthwhile in the first place in the
year 1980 there was a movie called
American Gigolo I'm about to make it
sound way more interesting than it
actually was what was it that made this
film special in the year 1980 what was
it that made it a big deal from the
perspective of the investors most likely
they were expecting the film to earn
money because of its sexual content it
discussed sex in a manner that was very
provocative and boundary-pushing for the
year 1980 it had nudity on screen it had
a good-looking cast in states of an
undress it was also set in a world of
wealth and privilege the costume and
wardrobe department featured a lot of
designer clothes so on and so forth so
in the same way that investors might pay
for a soap opera on Mexican television
you can imagine that when they were
looking at the checklist of factors that
made this film likely to earn back the
money or turn a profit on the investment
those might be the sorts of things they
were looking at but the truth is this
film was a hit and this film was
appreciated and remembered by critics
and so on because it was built around a
philosophical idea now that
philosophical idea is not tremendously
deep
complex you basically see it on screen
right now in this one quotation from
dialogue from the film the whole film is
built around that one idea okay this guy
has a sense of his own exceptionalism of
his own super moral purpose of being
above the law and then we get to see the
consequences of that as the plot plays
out now you can imagine if this film had
created a series of sequels like the
Star Wars movie franchise it would be
very easy for investors to say yes yes
yes let's have another film with a lot
of blunt discussion of human sexuality
let's have another film set amidst
wealth and privilege with designer
clothes
let's have first-rate cinematography
let's have a lot of nudity let's keep
going with American Gigolo two three or
four
let's do American Gigolo the prequel
trilogy
let's have American Gigolo co-starring
Jar Jar Binks it's going to be great
we're going to make millions of dollars
all those obvious tangible money-making
elements are easy for investors to
appreciate and if you lose sight of the
fact that you know what this movie had
one very simple philosophical idea and
the whole script was built around a set
of reflections on that one philosophical
idea and that's the only thing that made
this film memorable otherwise it's just
a bunch of naked bodies and designer
clothes and who cares I'm gonna say the
same thing
more or less about the film adaptation
of gone with the wind you can imagine
investors sitting down and trying to
make a franchise out of this try to have
gone with the wind to the Empire Strikes
Back and thinking you know why this film
was a big hit because it had fancy
costumes because it had hot chicks and
handsome men you know and the simmering
sexual tension between them and that
would be wrong
wrong the film version of Gone with the
Wind and I'm willing to accept this is
different from the novels in a
significant way the film version of Gone
with the Wind was built around the
philosophical tension created by Rhett
Butler there's a contrast introduced
right the Binion's film between Rhett
Butler and a younger more handsome more
idealistic man and in fact they
basically both want the same girl and
Rhett Butler doesn't believe in
nationalism he doesn't believe in any of
the romantic nonsense that young people
are you know getting excited about at
the start of the Civil War and the
reason for that is this completely
nihilistic economic analysis of where
the factories are and whoever has the
factories that make the guns is going to
win this war etc etc and this idealistic
younger man has this kind of nonsense
about how a gentleman won't be defeated
by a commoner sort of aristocratic
medieval way of thinking about honor and
nobility and Rhett Butler lets you know
he doesn't believe in nobility he
doesn't believe in being a gentleman he
believes in playing to win fighting to
survive he isn't working for the south
and he isn't working for America and he
isn't working for some ideal about a
brighter future
hee-hee Rhett Butler is in it for Rhett
Butler you see that the Wynette he's
working for himself and you get this
contrast between the ideals of other
characters the ideals of the underlying
or surrounding society and Rhett
Butler's brutal nihilistic
self-interested philosophy and that's
what makes a series of scenes at fancy
dress parties interesting okay a bunch
of hot chicks in expensive dresses is
boring okay there would be nothing
interesting about those scenes early in
the film if it didn't have this kind of
philosophical and political tension in
part created by or in part illustrated
by Rhett Butler Rhett
but learn nihilistic atheist
self-centered [ __ ] in a world of
pious hypocrites this same problem with
sequels missing the point not
understanding what it was
philosophically that made this scenario
worth watching in the first place
happened within the TV series Game of
Thrones right like in earlier seasons
they had success ultimately because the
show was built around a number of simple
but genuinely interesting philosophical
and political ideas and then once you
got past season four maybe maybe when
you got past season five it had
degenerated into this investor's
perspective of oh oh oh you got hot
chicks in fancy dresses you got
red-haired girls taking off their
clothes and showing you their bodies you
got big muscular dudes with swords
having sore fights like that's what
sells this show that's why this show is
a success and that's just not true that
is not what made Game of Thrones worth
watching
at all one of the most dramatic and
rapid examples of this kind of
degeneration of a film that had one or
two good philosophical ideas into
complete garbage was the original cinema
adaptation of Conan the Barbarian
now again sort of parallel to what I
just said about American Gigolo if you
haven't already seen this movie
don't don't watch it it's just not that
interesting but the first Conan the
Barbarian film was built around a number
of philosophical ideas basically from
Nietzsche Nietzsche and there's a little
bit from the philosopher Arthur
Schopenhauer but again you could
probably just take a few short
quotations from this film and show the
whole script the whole drama is built
around a couple of philosophical ideas
that are a little bit provocative a
little bit interesting and then what
happened with the sequels the sequels
degenerated into complete garbage
immediately
because the people investing in it
thought oh big muscles big swords their
interpretation of what made this film
successful or special or worth watching
was 100% wrong philosophically the
original 1977 Star Wars very much
emerged from the shadow of the novel
dune by Frank Herbert came out in 1965
but the philosophical differences from
dune are even more important than the
similarities dune written in 1965 was
fundamentally interested in a future
built around Islamic philosophy when
people read dude in 1965 most white
Western english-speaking people had
never heard the word jihad before there
was a lot of overtly Muslim ideology and
jargon in this book talked about jihad
thousands and thousands of years into
the future a technologically advanced
future were still the brutal simplicity
of the Muslim world view seemed to be
dominant and politically Frank Herbert
has characters saying in the dune series
I'm sorry I forget if this in the first
novel or not that you know people just
prefer to live under tyranny because
they would rather have a government they
hate rather than democracy so there's
something implicitly shocking about the
idea that in the future we're going to
go back to feudalism alright and Frank
Herbert's dune had that shock effect for
many people seeing star wars that was
part of what was shocking about it what
do you mean in the future there's a
princess government is about princesses
and emperors so in the future we have
all this advanced technology but we've
gone back to the dark ages politically
you know what do you mean
but in star wars the script was not
built around Muslim concepts the way
dune was instead the very first Star
Wars movie was built around loosely
adapted philosophy from Taoism and
Buddhism including by the way the jargon
in the same way that doon directly used
Arabic terms sometimes changing the
spelling slightly in the same way
actually George Lucas evidently took a
vacation in Thailand and he has pally
and Sanskrit terminology from Thai
Buddhism misspelled in a manner that
reflects the way people in Thailand
pronounce Buddhist terms okay that
includes the origin of the word Jedi do
you want me to break this stuff down for
you not worth explaining but yes a lot
of the ideas in Star Wars were vaguely
inspired by Taoism and Southeast Asian
Buddhism but in this breathtakingly
brutal feudal future where for no stated
reason humanity has forgotten about
democracy and has returned to you know
slavery outright slavery as well as some
kind of political structure from the
Dark Ages that's interesting that's
provocative when that first film came
out there were a whole lot of things
that had nothing to do with you know
spaceships blowing each other up
that was really provocative and
interesting and memorable it seemed to
raise a lot of really meaningful
questions about the future and about our
society and where it's going here and
now but if you want to know what
happened to Star Wars and why it
degenerated into garbage I think we can
never forget that as good as the first
film in 1977 was it was evident that
nobody in the creative team understood
what was good about it as early as 1978
when they made the Star Wars Holiday
Special
okay the 1978 Star Wars Holiday Special
is - the 1977 Star Wars just as brutal
and baleful a contrast as the sequels -
Conan the Barbarian were to the original
Conan the Barbarian good writing is
finite bad writing is infinite the
difference between the two is
stroke of an Editors pen you got three
different groups of people who fight
over the future of a franchise they're
the creative artists including the
authors there are the investors and then
there are people in the audience but the
people in the audience themselves very
often fail to apprehend philosophically
or politically what it is they're
getting excited about what it is they're
responding to there can be people in the
audience
millions of them who just watched the
first four seasons of Game of Thrones
and say wow great
dragons swords muscles nudity so they
can be giving that message loud and
clear the corporation creating this crap
and the corporation gets the message and
the investors hear what they want to
hear and they move in that direction
it's maybe harder to hear the voices
from the audience to say hey you know
what the reason why this is a hit the
reason why this matters and is
meaningful in the culture has nothing to
do with the boobs and the swords and the
Dragons it actually has to do with
questions that are being raised
philosophically and politically and if
you lose that if you lose that spark
then you lose the intrigue and interest
that made people overlook everything
that was wrong with the first movie or
everything that was wrong with the first
four seasons of came of Thrones
everything that motivated the audience
to put up with the [ __ ] that let's
face it always was there in any of this
schwa mediocre mainstream culture